Mitral regurgitation occurs when a diseased mitral valve leaks
or allows blood to flow backward
into the heart and congest the lungs.
Severe mitral regurgitation can cause
shortness of breath,
fatigue,
heart failure
and lead to an irregular heart rhythm
called atrial fibrillation.
Treating severe mitral regurgitation
usually involves open-heart surgery
to repair or replace the valve.
However, surgical repair or replacement
may be too high risk in some patients.
Less invasive procedures such as
transcatheter mitral valve repair
may be considered in this situation.
Transcatheter mitral valve repair
is an edge-to-edge repair of the mitral valve leaflets
that is completed within 2-3 hours
under general anesthesia.
Patients are completely asleep
with a breathing tube to keep them comfortable.
Transesophageal echocardiography
is utilized to help ensure successful placement of the device.
With the mitral repair procedure
a small puncture or incision is made in your groin
and the clips are delivered through a catheter
and are attached to the mitral valve leaflets.
Pulling them together
so the valve can close properly.
The clips are metal covered in fabric.
They become a permanent part of your heart.
After the procedure,
Patients can usually go home the same day
or the following day.
You will be ready for discharge
when your blood pressure and heart rhythm are stable,
you can get out of bed with minimal assistance,
and your groin sites are stable.